---
title: "Visualization of car crashes in Boston and their potential contributing factors"
date: 2019-05-12
published: true
excerpt: "This is the final project for MUSA620 by Wenxin Yang. The objective of this project is to visualize car crashes in Boston and their potential contributors."
folium-loader:
  f1: ["charts/final_heatmapwithtime.html", "400"]
  f2: ["charts/final_cluster_and_choro.html","400"]
altair-loader:
  a1: "charts/final_count_crash_150.json"
  a2: "charts/final_car_crash_mode_time_400.json"
  a3: "charts/final_car_crash_location_time_400.json"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true

---
## Introduction

This project visualizes car crashes in Boston (2015-2019) and their potential contributing factors--income level of the surrounding area, general transit mode, and location types, in an attempt to assist policymaking processes of reducing the number of car crashes.

Codes for achieving the following visualizations can be found in this [Jupyter notebook](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/wxyang007/datavizmusa620/blob/master/charts/Yang%2CWenxin_final.ipynb).



## Data and Methods

### Methods and Workflow

There are many potential contributing factors to car crashes. Among various possibilities, occurrence of car crashes could be influenced by the condition of surrounding environment, or may be pre-determined to an extent by the type of road or transit mode that people take.

Therefore, the objective of this study is to analyze the relationships between car crashes and several potential factors using data visualization. Specifically, car crashes in Boston by month are plotted first for the purpose of examining their general spatial distribution. Then, clustering of car crashes from 2015 to 2019 are analyzed in comparison with a choropleth map of median household income by census tract, where median household income is a proxy of the differences in surrounding environment. Finally, time series of the number of car crashes with different transit mode and location type are plotted.

Workflow of this project can be summarized as follows,
1. Data accessing and trimming
  * Acquire car crash and census data using APIs
  * Trim the data frames
  * Summarize car crash data by year (using groupby)
  * Summarize number of car crashes by transit mode and location type (spatial join and groupby)
2. Data visualizations
  * Generate heatmap with time series
  * Generate cluster map and overlay with choropleth maps
  * Create time slider of car crash with attributes
  * Tooltip graph

All of the steps are done in Python (Jupyter notebook).


### Packages Used

1 for data processing


* Accessing API
  - requests
  - io (StringIO)
  - census_area (Census): This is used to access data provided by the Census Bureau. An API key is needed before acquiring data (which can be applied online), and the dictionary of code to data can be found through this [link](https://api.census.gov/data/2017/acs/acs5/variables.html).
* Trim data
  - pandas
  - geopandas
  - datetime
  - shapely



2 for data visualization

* Folium: A Python version of Leaflet
  - Heatmap with time
  - Marker cluster

* Branca: A package that is used to generate style function in this project

* Altair: Interactive graph making


### Car Crash Data

Car crash data is acquired through API of [Boston Vision Zero Crashes Records](https://data.boston.gov/dataset/vision-zero-crash-records), which can be seen as follows.

<iframe width="600" height="300" src="https://data.boston.gov/dataset/vision-zero-crash-records/resource/e4bfe397-6bfc-49c5-9367-c879fac7401d/view/b54dda79-2fbd-4997-879e-99102981087a" frameBorder="0"></iframe>

### Median Income Level by Census Tract

Median household income by census tract is accessed through Census API.


## Results

### Heatmap With Time (Folium)

Below is a map that is a collection of heatmaps of car crashes by month, 2015 to 2019.

<div id="f1"></div>


Clustering appears all the time despite slight change of location throughout the months. Therefore, it is very likely that different locations have different car crash incidents. The remaining question is what part in particular is contributing.

_Pros of this visualization_:
* Make car crash patterns in different months comparable
* Shows general pattern across time

_Cons of this visualization_:
* Cannot know exactly which month of which year the map displays (if without further transformation)


### Income Choropleth & Crashes Cluster (Folium & Branca)

Below is an overlay of income choropleth map with cluster of total crashes. Bluer tracts indicate higher income level.

<div id="f2"></div>


At the default zoom level, there are six large clusters of crashes in Boston, all of which are not located in very blue areas, which supports the assumption that the number of car crashes is related with surrounding environment--in this case, income level.



_Pros of this visualization_:
* Overlay is a straightforward method to show relationship among multiple variables
* Scale of observation can be changed

_Cons of this visualization_:
* When further zoomed in, clustering at different areas become harder to compare
* No legend (because this is not generated with the default choropleth function in folium)



### Car Crashes VS Transit Mode & Location Type (Altair)

To analyze the relationships between car crashes with transit mode and location type, a chart that shows the number (and proportion) of crashes that occurred in different transit modes ('ped'=pedestrian, 'mv'=motor vehicle, and 'bike'=bike) and location types (street, intersection, and other) by year is created.


<div id ="a1"></div>


Despite differences in year, most crashes occurred with motor vehicles, then pedestrians, and then bikes, which could be related with the number of people using these transit modes. Meanwhile, there are almost always more crashes that occurred on intersections than anywhere else (including streets).


_Pros of this visualization_:
* Direct representation of change over time

_Cons of this visualization_:
* Cannot eliminate the effect of proportion ridership of different transit modes
* The chart will look smoother if there are more years with data



### Car Crashes VS Transit Mode / Location Type & Time (Altair)

A further look is taken into the relationship between car crashes with transit modes and location types respectively.

<div id ="a2"></div>

<div id ="a3"></div>


_Pros of these visualizations_:
* Straightforward

_Cons of these visualizations_:
* It might be better if there is (1) a line of total number of car crashes, and (2) the change of grey line can be reflected in both charts at the same time




## Concluding Remarks


These analyses are entirely based on visual observation and hence biased. Statistical analyses (linear regressions) of median household income on number of car crashes were performed prior to the creation of this GitHub page, which can be accessed through this [link](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/wxyang007/datavizmusa620/blob/master/charts/Prep_final_MUSA620.ipynb).


Future improvement may include introducing more variables and combining these visualizations into a single 'app'.


## References

* Folium visualizations
  - [Heatmap with time](https://towardsdatascience.com/data-101s-spatial-visualizations-and-analysis-in-python-with-folium-39730da2adf)
  - [Choropleths with branca](https://python-visualization.github.io/folium/quickstart.html)
* Altair visualizations
  - [How to save altair in json format](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/saving_charts.html#json-format)
  - [Creating the first altair chart](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/us_population_over_time.html)
  - [Creating the last two charts](https://matthewkudija.com/blog/2018/06/22/altair-interactive/)
* Most other codes credit to [MUSA620-2019 taught by Nick Hand](https://github.com/MUSA-620-Spring-2019)
